Rework the Timestamps section, add monotonic (#290)
quicwg/qlog: draft-ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema.md

included in the "time_format" field.

There is no requirement that events in the same trace use the same time format.
However, using a single time format for related events can make them easier to
analyze.

Definition:

~~~ cddl
TimeFormat = "absolute" /
             "delta" /
             "relative" /
             "monotonic" .default "absolute"
~~~
{: #time-format-def title="TimeFormat definition"}

absolute:
: A full absolute timestamp. This approach uses the
  largest amount of characters. This is the default value of the "time_format"
  field.

delta:
: A delta-encoded value, based on the previously logged value. The first event
  in a trace typically logs the full absolute timestamp. This approach uses the
  least amount of characters.

relative:
: A relative timestamp based on some relative time base.  The log SHOULD specify
  a "reference_time" timestamp, either by providing it explicitly in the
  "reference_time" field in "common_fields" ({{common-fields}}) or logging an
  absolute time in the first event. This approach uses a medium amount of
  characters.

monotonic:
: A relative timestamp based on an opaque monotonically nondecreasing clock.

>   The "reference_time" field MUST NOT be applied to this format, since it based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The "reference_time" field MUST NOT be applied to this format, since it's based
```

>   on an opaque clock that cannot be interpreted beyond the process that

Reviewer: This whole sentence is hard to understand (I'm not even sure I really grasp it), and the `it's` is ambiguous: is it "this format" or "the reference_time"?

Overall, imo this section does not really explain how monotonic is different from relative, nor why it's useful/needed.

Author: I tried to clarify the sentence to make it clear what it being measured.

Beyond that, I'm not sure how to more clearly describe that `relative` and `monotonic` are different. The monotonic description is succinct. So the relative format probably needs more wordsmithing for preciseness, rather than have people making assumptions.

>   The "reference_time" field MUST NOT be applied to this format, since it's based
>   on an opaque clock that cannot be interpreted beyond the process that

Author: ```suggestion
  The "reference_time" field MUST NOT be applied to this format, since monotonic
  time is measured against an opaque clock that cannot be interpreted beyond the system that
```

  instantiated it.

Events in each individual trace SHOULD be logged in strictly ascending timestamp
order (though not necessarily absolute value, for the "delta" format). Tools CAN
sort all events on the timestamp before processing them, though are not required
to (as this could impose a significant processing overhead). This can be a problem
especially for multi-threaded and/or streaming loggers, who could consider using a
separate post-processor to order qlog events in time if a tool do not provide this
feature.

> There is no default base clock for formats that rely on a sharable clock. Tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no default base clock for formats that rely on a shareable clock. Tools
```

Reviewer: This is also a bit vague... what exactly is a "shareable clock", terminology not used before this. Does it mean sharing the same clock across traces (e.g., one taken at the server, one at the client, later combined?) or does it mean deriving timing values from a single clock reading (i.e., relative and delta). I assume the latter, but the quiche PR that triggered this is mainly talking about the former?

Author: Yeah I'm not a fan of the word shareable here but struggled to find a suitable term. This is really just intended to be a rewording pf the old text that was focussed on unix-y time. If folks are using an abosulute timestamp, somewhere they should be indicating the actual format and rules for that, including where its epoch is anchored. Saying "you don't have to use UNIX time" like the old text is glossing over a lot of complexity.

Happy to rewrite this part if we can agree on what should be communicated.

SHOULD NOT assume the ability to derive the absolute Unix timestamp from qlog

> traces. Tools should not rely events to be be consistent across traces, even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
traces. Tools should not rely on timestamps to be consistent across traces, even
```

those generated by the same logging endpoint. For reasons of privacy, a more
privacy-preserving reference timestamp could be chosen.

The "absolute" format is good for stateless loggers. The other formats suit
stateful loggers.

Formats that use smaller values can produce smaller-sized file and can be easier
to reason about during analysis. An example for each option can be seen in
{{time-format-ex}}.

~~~~~~~~
Example "absolute" TimeFormat values:
1500, 1505, 1522, 1588

Example "delta" TimeFormat values:
1500, 5, 17, 66

Example "reference" TimeFormat values, assuming a reference_time of 1500
in "common_fields":
0, 5, 22, 88

Example "monotonic" TimeFormat values:

> 0, 5, 22, 88

Reviewer: This enforces my confusion about why `monotonic` is needed and how it's different from `relative`... 

The way I understand it is that monotonic does not necessarily adhere to milliseconds between events? 
So say the relative values would be 
`0, 5, 22, 88`

Then the monotonic ones for the same absolute event timestamps could be
`0, 4, 17, 94`
(due to clock drift, intentional fuzzing for privacy/timing attacks, etc.)

If that's true, the examples should reflect this better.

Author: Relative and monotonic are both formats that use a delta encoding but that's where the similarity ends.

Per the current definition of reference format, it has to be related to something that various systems can agree on. For example, sticking January 1 2023 in all my logs and logging the duration in seconds since that date would work for a reference time. Ideally, you understand what that date is, so that you can add the time deltas in order determine their absolute timestamp. It is important to agree on a calendaring or date/time system because things like leap seconds, daylight savings, or clock skew can mean your relative-time event has negative values. This makes sorting qlogs fun.

With monotonic clocks, there is no universal calendaring or date/time. A system picks _something_ and you can  then calculate durations against that. As long a single system generates events, the durations are guaranteed to never decrement. See for example https://linux.die.net/man/3/clock_gettime where

> CLOCK_MONOTONIC
Clock that cannot be set and represents monotonic time since some unspecified starting point.

So one core difference is that reference can be negative and montonic can never.  So the reference example might want to include that.

Another core difference is that monotonic typically has no reference_time that can be communicated meaningfully. Its literally not possible to obtain it on such systems.

we could make the monotonic values different for the sake of it, if it helps avoid confusion.
